# The impact on AI from the perspective of the teachingRSE project
Authors: Florian Goth, Frank Löffler, Magnus Hagdorn, Jan Linxweiler

We consider actual classroom experiences and maybe also the career path angle.

## Contribution
The teachingRSE project represents an open group of individuals mostly from Germany that brings together experiences of teaching research software engineering at research institutions.
We are a recognised special interest group of de-RSE e.V and of the German computer science association.

In our opinion, generative AI tools have a large impact on both the learners and the teachers.

GenAI tools for programming are now widely available and many beginners are using these tools to solve their programming tasks.
Tool use ranges from getting the entire task solved by the AI system to using it to walk the student through the task at hand. 
Using an AI to simply solve a problem does not encourage learning. 
The second approach, using the AI as a coach, can help the student explore the problem space and fill any knowledge gaps they might have.
In both cases, there is a risk that the AI user will take the results at face value and becomes reliant on the AI.
Many programming problems suitable for beginners are easily solved by genAI systems because they are well documented.
This reinforces the dangerous habit of trusting the results without checking them. 
As a consequence, teaching will have to put even more emphasis on skills like testing and Test Driven Development.

So far, teachers have relied on problems to introduce programming to students, mostly on a detailed, algorithmic level.
However, as noted above, these problems are documented and easily solved using genAI.
Hence, the focus of teaching should shift from lower-level details to a higher conceptual level, meaning that instead of learning 
how to implement certain algorithms, it will be much more important to learn how to structure applications on a higher (architectural) level.
As a result, AI enables the handling of scientific problems at a higher level of abstraction, allowing even more complex problems to be addressed.
However, in order to be able to effectively communicate with the AI at a higher level, students need to learn the higher-level concepts, such as design and architectural patterns.

Still, to review results generated by an AI, the user needs to understand them, or at least test them sufficiently.
Also, we fear that by bypassing the simpler problems, the students miss the opportunity to gain the required skills and experience.
This also manifests itself in the job market, where the tasks for junior people are now squeezed out in favour of AI systems.
This effectively means that these people never have the opportunity to mature into senior roles.

The ability to critically review outputs of genAI systems will become far more important.
The speed with which new content can now be generated will pose a problem for the scientific community and the adherence to the FAIR principles.
With genAI systems it becomes very easy for researchers to just produce stuff and forget about its reproducibility afterwards.


Programming as well as learning how to program is a social activity.
When learners interact predominantly with an AI, fellow learners are denied the opportunity to explain a problem which is important to further enhance students' understanding.












## DELETE AFTER THIS WHEN FINALISING!!!

Here the original mail:

As discussed, I'd like to ask each of you to send me a short input of around half an A4 page, sharing your perspective. A few pointers:

 

    Please indicate which perspective you are representing (e.g. publisher, funder, researcher, etc.). Feel free to share multiple perspectives if you feel you represent multiple perspectives
    
    As technological advances move quickly, we're aiming for high-level, general perspectives that are not tied to a specific GenAI model
    
    Your input can cover positive experiences and opportunities, negative experiences and concerns, or both

 

Using this input, I will identify cross-cutting opportunities and issues that for the outline of a position paper, which we can discuss next meeting.

 

Could you please send me your input by the 6th of May? You can just send me an email with your input.

 
